Application data sheet	Bibliographic Data		Secrecy Order 37 CFR 5.2			NONE		Applicant Information			Inventors:				Suzanne Marie Bottum-Jones				898 Logtown Rd				Mineral Point WI 53565				Citizenship under 37 CFR 1.41(b): United States				Michael Christopher Bottum				N9034 Townline Road				East Troy WI 53120				Citizenship under 37 CFR 1.41(b): United States				Paul William  Bottum				1933 Oriole N				Stillwater MN 55082				Citizenship under 37 CFR 1.41(b): United States			Inventor Residence:				N9034 Townline Road				East Troy WI 53120				United States			Correspondence Information:				N9034 Townline Road				East Troy WI 53120				262 492 9341				mcbottum@centurytel.net		Title of Invention:			Adaptive Behavior Assessment and Intervention Tool-ABAIT						Small Entity Status Claimed:			YES				Application Type:			Utility			Provisional Patent				Application Number - 61/425,760				Filing Date - 12/22/2010				Confirmation Number - 5336				Assignee Information			Suzanne Marie Bottum-Jones			898 Logtown Rd			Mineral Point WI 53565			United States			608 732 7771			rizaj5@gmail.com							Michael Christopher Bottum			N9034 Townline Road			East Troy WI 53120			United States			262 492 9341			mcbottum@centurytel.net			Paul William  Bottum			1933 Oriole N			Stillwater MN 55082			United States			615 324 4227			pbottum@comcast.net		Digital Signature			/Michael Christopher Bottum/ 	12/18/2011			 Michael Christopher BottumTitle of Invention:		Adaptive Behavior Assessment and Intervention Tool-ABAIT	Abstract of the Disclosure[0001]		Some embodiments of the invention provide a software generated protocol for the management of individuals exhibiting agitated behavior episodes such as those diagnosed with dementia related disorders.  In some embodiments, the generated management protocol is adaptive in nature.  The protocol is initially derived from global behavior data sets representing the individual’s cohort population.  Through time, as care providers administer the protocols during agitated behavior incidents, and record their effectiveness, the software continually compares this anecdotal data to the global data sets, realigning and refining management strategies set forth in the management protocol to a individual’s unique case.  The invention also provides, in some embodiments, the means of monitoring and reporting behavior management effectiveness relative to resource investment  as well as reduced use of pharmacological interventions.References Cited20060230007				October 12, 2006			Boettcher; Iris F.; et al.Other References(1)Hebert, LE; Scherr, PA; Bienias, JL; Bennett, DA; Evans, DA. “AD in the U.S. population: Prevalence estimates using the 2000 Census.” Archives of Neurology 2003;60(8):1119–1122.(2)Alzheimer’s Association. Changing the Trajectory of AD: A National Imperative. 2010. Available at www.alz.org.(3)The Changing Brain in AD http://www.nia.nih.gov/Alzheimers/Publications/Unraveling/Part2/changing.htm )(4)Challenges in Dementia Care Eric G. Tangalos, MD, FACP, AGSF, CMD, www.MedicarePatientManagement.com, May 2009(5)American Health Care Association (AHCA),Results of the 2002 AHCA Survey of Nursing Staff Vacancy and Turnover in Nursing Homes (Washington, DC: AHCA, February 12, 2003. REFERENCE TO RELATED APPLICATIONSThis application claims priority to United States Provisional Application 	filed on December 12, 2010, 	assigned Application No. 61/425,760 and 	titled "Adaptive Behavior Assessment and Intervention Tool - ABAIT".Claims[0002] A software based, resident specific, agitated behavior management tool comprising: a means of logging and categorizing exhibited agitated behaviors, a means of identifying likely stimuli causing or exacerbating exhibited agitated behaviors, the creation of a hierarchical list of predicted effective interventions to the exhibited agitated behaviors based on global and resident specific experience, a means of quantitatively assessing the actual effectiveness of attempted interventions, a means of adapting and re-ordering the intervention list based on measured resident specific effectiveness, and a means of reporting overall performance history of the agitated behavior management.[0003] The tool of claim 1 wherein agitated behaviors of residents are identified, contains an editable database of agitated behaviors common to resident’s cohort population.[0004] The database of claim 2 wherein agitated behaviors are listed and defined, contains quantified behavior intensities for each of the agitated behaviors.[0005] The tool of claim 1 wherein likely stimuli to agitated behaviors are identified,contains an editable database of triggers known to affect agitated behaviors.[0006]The tool of claim 1 wherein a list of interventions is created, contains an editabledatabase of interventions shown historically to be effective against triggers and affected agitated behaviors of claim 2. [0007]The databases of claim 4 wherein agitated behaviors are identified, and claim 5wherein intervention effectiveness is stored, allow for recording quantitative and qualitative measures of behavior intensity and intervention effectiveness during and after the management of an agitated behavior episode. [0008]7. As the tool of claim 1 is employed in during a behavior episode,  the agitated behavior, trigger and intervention databases of claim 2, claim 4 and claim 5 are restructured according to the following criterion; time of behavior episode, duration, intensity, trigger, and Intervention Effectiveness.[0009] Intervention Effectiveness of claim 7 is determined both globally and on a resident specific basis according to a combination of the following criterion;Time of day of agitated behavior episode,Largest reduction in agitated behavior intensity,Most rapid, non pharmacologically induced reduction in agitated behavior intensity.[0010]9. The restructured Intervention database of claim 7, and as explained in claim 8 generates a highly adaptive Hierarchically Organized, Resident Specific, Intervention Solution Set with which a care provider may most effectively manage agitated behaviors through the progression of disease manifesting those behaviors.[0011]10. The ABAIT tool of claim 1 wherein agitated behavior management may be reported, provides data manipulation tools which aid in administrative level analysis and reporting of variables such as agitated behavior episode durations or frequencies, intervention effectiveness, care provider management performance, resource investment or pharmacological intervention frequencies.Field of the Invention[0012] 	The invention is directed towards an adaptive behavior management tool which addresses the dynamic nature of degenerative neurological disordersBackground of the Invention[0013]		As the populations of developed nations age, health care strategies must adapt to effectively address the associated changes in health issues and costs.  Here in the United Sates, for example, by 2030, the number of people aged 65 and older with Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is estimated to reach 7.7 million — a 50 percent increase from the 5.2 million aged 65 and older currently affected by the disease(1). The accompanying health care cost associated with these projections will significantly burden the US health care system. Total payments for healthcare, long-term care and hospice for people with AD and other dementias are projected to increase from $183 billion in 2011 to $1.1 trillion in 2050 (in 2011 dollars)(2).[0014]		AD, in particular, and dementia, in general, are typically considered degenerative conditions in which afflicted individuals become progressively dependent on assisted living type health care resources ranging  from long-term care (LTC) facilities, to nursing homes, or, eventually to hospitals. The primary challenge to health care providers may not be the shear number of AD cases, rather, the unpredictable manifestation of the disease. Although in AD neuro-degeneration takes a common course - cerebral mapping studies show from temporal lobe to parietal lobe to frontal cortex(3) - the timing and specific affect on behaviors is very individual for each person. Additionally, AD is only one cause for dementia symptoms. Other causes such as vascular dementia, Lewy Body dementia, Frontal Temporal dementia, and mixed dementia, each affects a different area of the brain and therefore presents its own set of behavior progression and staging.  It is apparent that truly effective dementia care strategies;must address the the specific needs of the individual patient, andmust be highly adaptable to the dynamic nature of the disease’s progression.[0015]		Studies conducted in association with the American Medical Directors Association (AMDA), American Psychiatric Association (APA), American Academy of Neurology (AAN), and others, have determined that care strategies designed to specifically address a dementia patient’s unique case, known typically as “Patient Centered Care”, tend to slow the progression of dementia, reduce associated health care costs, and reduce the frequency of health problems secondary to dementia.(4)[0016]		Within the US health care infrastructure, as the care of individuals suffering from dementia transitions from family members to institutionalized care, it becomes the role of the LTC to design and implement Patient Centered Care strategies.  Although several attempts have been made to standardize and streamline Patient Centered Care practices (USPTO #20060230007 October 12, 2006), beyond general guidelines set out by the AMDA and others, little procedural uniformity in providing adaptive management strategies addressing the dynamic nature of dementia exists.[0017]		One of the key challenges to improved uniformity and quality of care within the Long Term Care (LTC) environment is that there is minimal institutional memory. This shortcoming ultimately limits the opportunity for residents to experience consistent, valid quality care. One care provider, for example, may manage a resident in one fashion, while in a subsequent shift another care provider, in a very similar situation, may manage the same resident in a different fashion.  Inability of care providers to share and learn from experiential care information ultimately limits the likelihood of providers intervening in what might be considered the “agitated behavior escalation curve” associated with dementia. A systematic process which would allow care providers;to share information, to learn from repeated incidents,  to adapt management  strategies to the progressive nature of dementia,for peer to peer teaching,for constructive, objective, resident management performance feedback,is not currently available to long term care providers.  The lack of structure lends to an extremely high burnout and turnover rate of qualified care provider personnel - further hindering increased quality of care.  In fact, a survey of Certified Nursing Assistants (CNAs) found turnover rates of over 70% during the first year, and has high as 90% by the second year of employment - citing lack of direction and burnout as the primary motivation for change.(5) [0018]		This lack of structure may seem odd in today's technologically sophisticated, information driven environment, however LTC facilities have not been targeted by productivity enhancement tools.  The shortcomings identified above tend to produce an environment inherently fragmented in its implementation of resident care, staffed by minimally experienced and trained personnel.  Brief Summary of the Invention[0019]		ABAIT is a database driven software product which manages resident care.  ABAIT is specifically tailored to the needs of care providers responsible for managing residents prone to episodes of non-self controlled (agitated) behavior episodes i.e. : Dementia residents, special education students.  ABAIT provides a means of creating agitated behavior management plans which are highly structured, yet inherently adaptive to the dynamic nature dementia type cases.[0020]		As a resident is first entered into the ABAIT databases, information regarding typical triggers to uncontrolled behavior episodes, types of behavior, and attempted behavior interventions is gathered for up to a two week “behavior characterization” period. [0021]		Once a resident’s behavior has been characterized, a behavior management plan, named a “behavior scale” by ABAIT, composed of historically proven, and resident specific interventions, is generated.  During a resident’s care, especially those with degenerative cases such as dementia, behavior patterns change.  As a resident’s behavior scale is employed, its effectiveness is continually monitored, which, in turn, restructures the resident’s intervention database according to behavior pattern changes, intervention/behavior compatibility and intervention effectiveness.  The restructured databases cause the behavior scales to continually evolve in order that most effective, behavior appropriate interventions are recommended first, minimizing management time/resource investment and possible use of medication.  [0022]		Through the use of cataloged agitated behaviors, common triggers to those behaviors, and  experientially proven effective interventions, the ABAIT program transforms a methodologically unstructured care environment, into a consistent, though adaptive, resident specific care environment.  [0023]		As care providers learn and use the common working vocabularies generated by the ABAIT databases, critical observational skills in a typically poorly educated workforce are developed and promoted.   As care providers’ observational skills develop and are recorded, data feeds back into the ABAIT programming, ensuring the production of a continually evolving management solution set required to keep pace with the development of a resident’s condition.  The compilation and use of care data in this manner presents the care provider with a tool to stay ahead of the “agitated behavior escalation curve” identified in paragraph 0017.[0024]		ABAIT additionally provides a methodology that is practical for a nurse administrator to track their aides’ performance in managing the residents.  In turn, a physician then has a methodologically controlled account of what is occurring with a given resident prior to judging whether powerful medications are needed.  The savings from utilization would involve lower prescriptions, less non-compliance fines, less staff turnover, and a more attractive dwelling for residents.  Additional savings may be realized through the reduction in the downward health spiral that frequently occurs following the utilization of psychotropics.  The insurance companies that manage Medicare and Medicaid lives (i.e., United Health Care) will be keenly aware of these savings.  In turn, insurance carriers could be strong advocates of the ABAIT tool.[0025]		Through creating and recording strict, though adaptive procedural behavior management strategies, ABAIT is unique in that it creates a data trail which allows the reproducible definition of individualized resident management plans (Patient Centered Care) as well as institutional or even global scale management guidelines in accordance with those set out by the AMDA.Brief Description of the Drawings[0026] 	Figure 1.  This screenshot diagrams the flow of information through the ABAIT tool.  Privilege levels and responsibilities are coded by color.[0027]		Figure 2. This screenshot shows the type of data collected during the behavior characterization process for residents.[0028]		Figure 3.  This screenshot shows the type of information provided to the administrator creating a resident screen.[0029]		Figure 4.  This screenshot shows an actual behavior screen.Detailed Description of the Invention[0030]		As stated in the abstract, some embodiments of the invention provide a software generated protocol for the management of residents exhibiting agitated behavior episodes such as those diagnosed dementia related disorders.  In some embodiments, the generated management protocol is adaptive in nature.  The protocol is initially derived from global behavior data sets representing the resident’s cohort population.  Through time, the software continually compares anecdotal data regarding effectiveness of the management protocol to the global data sets, realigning and refining management strategies set forth in the management protocol to a resident’s unique case.  The invention also provides, in some embodiments, the means of monitoring and reporting behavior management effectiveness relative to resource investment  as well as reduced use of psychotropic interventions.  [0031]		To fully explain the invention, Section I presents relevant terminology, while Section II outlines the procedural steps of the application’s use.[0032]Terms and Terminology	agitated behavior, a behavior requiring intervention, 	trigger, stimulus causing agitated behavior, 	intervention, response of care giver to intervene with the agitated behavior.	ABAIT Scale, protocol for the management of residents a resident and agitated behavior specific management tool generated by the ABAIT program.[0033]II.	Use of the ABAIT tool involves the following procedural steps	Step 1: Tool Configuration	Step 2: Behavior Characterization	Step 3: Behavior Scale Creation	Step 4: Behavior Scale Use	Step 5: ABAIT Scale Adaptation	Step 6: Administrative Level ReportingStep 1: Tool Configuration[0034]		As the ABAIT tool (which will be referred to simply as the tool during the remainder of this description)  is introduced into a facility, several administrative duties must be preformed.  First an administrator must configure the tool to their institution’s specific needs (see “Program Set-up”, Fig 1). Configuration involves three tasks; entering general classes of disruptive behaviors, entering personal caregiver data, and entering personal resident data.  Second, administrators must educate caregivers on the use and data flow of the ABAIT program .  Education is facilitated through a tutorial included in the tool (see “Tutorials”, Fig. 1).  Of particular importance to the successful use of the tool are the concepts of;Step 2: Behavior Characterization[0035]		Once caregivers are comfortable with tool use, they may use it to log information regarding agitated behavior episodes for which scales have not yet been created (either new residents or novel behaviors).  Figure 2 represents typical data which may be recorded  during a behavior episode.  [0036]		Behaviors are characterized both generally according to categories administrators have defined, and specifically as caregivers have observed them. Additionally behavior intensities, triggers causing the behavior episode and most and least effective interventions are logged.  Finally time of day and duration of episodes are recorded. Time required to fill out and submit a behavior characterization template requires approximately 60 seconds.[0037]		Once a minimum of a two week characterization period has lapsed, and multiple behavior episodes have been logged, the tool reminds administrators that sufficient data has been collected for the creation of a resident’s behavior scale.Step 3: Behavior Scale Creation[0038]		A behavior scale provides a resident specific template for managing agitated behavior episodes.  Administrators create behavior scales by matching behavior triggers interventions selected from either a historically complied list or anecdotal experience (see “Trigger 1” and “Intervention” drop down lists, fig 3).  [0039]		Figure 3 represents the manner in which behavior episode data is displayed to the administrator during behavior scale creation.  Up to six interventions may be assigned to each trigger. Field testing has shown that behavior scale creation typically requires five minutes.Step 4: Behavior Scale Use[0040]		As a care provider is confronted with a resident displaying an agitated behavior, the ABAIT tool provides resident and behavior specific scales which recommend interventions as well as opportunities for intervention effectiveness assessment.[0041]		To use an ABAIT scale a care provider would select a resident’s name, and general category of behavior.  ABAIT then displays the recommended management protocol, or scale, for the behavior (see fig. 4). Interventions are listed by the ABAIT hierarchically from historically most to least effective for that resident and category of behavior.[0042]		Care providers are instructed to administer an intervention for twenty minutes before attempting additional interventions if behavior has not subsided.  Intervention effectiveness is logged as the final bit of data on the scale (see “Behavior Intensity BEFORE then AFTER Intervention”, fig. 4).Step 5: ABAIT Scale Adaptation[0043]		As Resident Scale Data is logged, the ABAIT software examines intervention effectiveness based on observed change in behavior intensity during the behavior episode.  Thus, an intervention’s value (effectiveness) is continually adjusted in a Bayesian manner as scales are logged.  The hierarchical intervention lists displayed  on the behavior scales are continually shuffled in order that interventions established to be most effective are presented first.  [0044]		The dynamic nature of behavior scales ensures that, despite changes in a residents condition, whether extrinsic, or intrinsic, the most effective agitated behavior management plan is always presented.Step 6: Administrative Level Reporting[0045]		ABAIT software provides automated global data reporting options on thirty day or custom time intervals.  Variables such as episode frequencies vs. time of day, overall intervention effectiveness, time investment, or frequency of pharmacological interventions may be reported on either an institution wide, individual care provider or resident basis.[0046]		The foregoing description of the invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed, and other modifications and variations may be possible in light of the above teachings. The embodiments were chosen and described in order to best explain the principles of the invention and its practical application to thereby enable others skilled in the art to best utilize the invention in various embodiments and various modifications as are suited to the particular use contemplated.FiguresOath Or Declaration[0046]		Please see attached forms PTO/SB/01A, PTO/SB/02Adaptive Behavior Assessment and Intervention Tool-ABAIT   Application#61/425,7601